# Contributing to pyDVL

The goal of pyDVL is to be a repository of successful algorithms for the
valuation of data, in a broader sense. Contributions are welcome from anyone in
the form of pull requests, bug reports and feature requests.

We will consider for inclusion any (tested) implementation of an algorithm
appearing in a peer-reviewed journal (even if the method does not improve the
state of the art, for benchmarking and comparison purposes). We are also open to
improvements to the currently implemented methods and other ideas. Please open a
ticket with yours.

If you are interested in setting up a similar project, consider the template 
[pymetrius](https://github.com/appliedAI-Initiative/pymetrius).

## Local development

This project uses [ruff](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff) to lint and format code and
[pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) to invoke it as a git pre-commit hook.
Consider installing any of [ruff's IDE
integrations](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/editors/setup/)
to make your life easier.

Run the following to set up the pre-commit git hook to run before pushes:

```shell
pre-commit install --hook-type pre-push
```

Additionally, we use Git LFS for some files like images. Install with

```shell
git lfs install
```

## Setting up your environment

We strongly suggest using some form of virtual environment for working with the
library. E.g. with venv:

```shell
python -m venv ./venv
. venv/bin/activate  # `venv\Scripts\activate` in windows
pip install -r requirements-dev.txt -r requirements-docs.txt
```

With conda:

```shell
conda create -n pydvl python=3.9
conda activate pydvl
pip install -r requirements-dev.txt -r requirements-docs.txt
```

A very convenient way of working with your library during development is to
install it in editable mode into your environment by running

```shell
pip install -e .
```

In order to build the documentation locally (which is done as part of the tox
suite) you need to install additional non-python dependencies as described in
the [documentation of mkdocs-material](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/plugins/requirements/image-processing/#cairo-graphics).

In addition, [pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) is required. Except for OSX, 
it should be installed automatically as a dependency with 
`requirements-docs.txt`. Under OSX you can install pandoc 
(you'll need at least version 2.11) with:

```shell
brew install pandoc
```

Remember to mark all autogenerated directories as excluded in your IDE. In
particular `docs_build` and `.tox` should be marked as excluded to avoid
slowdowns when searching or refactoring code.

If you use remote execution, don't forget to exclude data paths from deployment
(unless you really want to sync them).


## Testing

Automated builds, tests, generation of documentation and publishing are handled
by [CI pipelines](#ci). Before pushing your changes to the remote we recommend
to execute `tox` locally in order to detect mistakes early on and to avoid
failing pipelines. tox will:
* run the test suite
* build the documentation
* build and test installation of the package.
* generate coverage reports in html, as well as badges.

You can configure pytest, coverage and ruff by adjusting
[pyproject.toml](https://github.com/aai-institute/pyDVL/blob/develop/pyproject.toml).

Besides the usual unit tests, most algorithms are tested using pytest. This
requires ray for the parallelization and Memcached for caching. Please install
both before running the tests. We run [tests in CI](#ci) as well.

It is possible to pass optional command line arguments to pytest, for example to
run only certain tests using patterns (`-k`) or marker (`-m`).

```shell
tox -e tests -- <optional arguments>
```

There are a few important arguments:

- `--memcached-service` allows to change the default of `localhost:11211` (memcached's default)
  to a different address.

  [Memcached](https://www.memcached.org/) is needed for testing
  caching as well as speeding certain methods (e.g. Permutation Shapley).

  To start memcached locally in the background with Docker use:

  ```shell
  docker run --name pydvl-memcache -p 11211:11211 -d memcached
  ```

- `-n` sets the number of parallel workers for 
  [pytest-xdist](https://pytest-xdist.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
  
  There are two layers of parallelization in the tests.
  An inner one within the tests themselves, i.e. the parallelism in the algorithms,
  and an outer one by pytest-xdist. The latter is controlled by the `-n` argument.
  If you experience segmentation faults with the tests,
  try running them with `-n 0` to disable parallelization.

- `--slow-tests` enables running slow tests. See below for a description
  of slow tests.

- `--with-cuda` sets the device fixture in [tests/influence/torch/conftest.py](
  https://github.com/aai-institute/pyDVL/blob/develop/tests/influence/torch/conftest.py)
  to `cuda` if it is available. Using this fixture within tests, you can run parts
  of your tests on a `cuda` device. Be aware, that you still have to take care of
  the usage of the device manually in a specific test. Setting this flag does not
  result in running all tests on a GPU.

### Markers

We use a few different markers to differentiate between tests and runs
groups of them of separately. Use `pytest --markers` to get a list and description
of all available markers.

Two important markers are:

- `pytest.mark.slow` which is used to mark slow tests and skip them by default.

  A slow test is any test that takes 45 seconds or more to run and that can be
  skipped most of the time. In some cases a test is slow, but it is required
  in order to ensure that a feature works as expected and that are no bugs.
  In those cases, we should not use this marker.

  Slow tests are always run on CI. Locally, they are skipped
  by default but can be additionally run using: `pytest --slow-tests`.

- `pytest.mark.torch` which is used to mark tests that require PyTorch.

  To test modules that rely on PyTorch, use:

  ```shell
  tox -e tests -- -m "torch"
  ```

### Other Things

To test the notebooks separately, run (see [below](#notebooks) for details):

```shell
tox -e notebook-tests
```

To create a package locally, run:
```shell
python setup.py sdist bdist_wheel
```

## Notebooks

We use notebooks both as documentation (copied over to `docs/examples`) and as
integration tests. All notebooks in the `notebooks` directory are executed
during the test run. Because run times are typically too long for large
datasets, you must check for the `CI` environment variable to work
with smaller ones. For example, you can select a subset of the data:

```python
# In CI we only use a subset of the training set
if os.environ.get('CI'):
    training_data = training_data[:10]
```

This switching should happen in a separate notebook cell tagged with
`hide` to hide the cell's input and output when rendering it as part of
the documents. We want to avoid as much clutter and boilerplate
as possible in the notebooks themselves.

Because we want documentation to include the full dataset, we commit notebooks
with their outputs running with full datasets to the repo. The notebooks are
then added by CI to the section
[Examples](https://aai-institute.github.io/pyDVL/examples.html) of the
documentation.

### Hiding cells in notebooks

Switching between CI or not, importing generic modules and plotting results are
all examples of boilerplate code irrelevant to a reader interested in pyDVL's
functionality. For this reason we choose to isolate this code into separate
cells which are then hidden in the documentation.

In order to do this, cells are marked with tags understood by the mkdocs
plugin [`mkdocs-jupyter`](https://github.com/danielfrg/mkdocs-jupyter#readme),
namely adding the following to the metadata of the relevant cells:

```yaml
"tags": [
  "hide"
]
```

To hide the cell's input and output.

Or:

```yaml
"tags": [
  "hide-input"
]
```

To only hide the input and

```yaml
"tags": [
  "hide-output"
]
```
for hiding the output only.

It is important to leave a warning at the top of the document to avoid confusion.
Examples for hidden imports and plots are available in the notebooks, e.g. in
*notebooks/shapley_basic_spotify.ipynb*.

### Plots in Notebooks
If you add a plot to a notebook, which should also render nicely in browser
dark mode, add the tag *invertible-output*, i.e.

```yaml
"tags": [
  "invertible-output"
]
```
This applies a simple CSS-filter to the output image of the cell.

## Documentation

API documentation and examples from notebooks are built with
[mkdocs](https://www.mkdocs.org/), using a number of plugins, including
[mkdoctrings](https://mkdocstrings.github.io/), with versioning handled by
[mike](https://github.com/jimporter/mike).

Notebooks are an integral part of the documentation as well, please read
[the section on notebooks](#notebooks) above.

If you want to build the documentation locally, please make sure you followed
the instructions in the section 
[Setting up your environment](#setting-up-your-environment).

Use the following command to build the documentation the same way it is
done in CI:

```bash
mkdocs build
```

Locally, you can use this command instead to continuously rebuild documentation
on changes to the `docs` and `src` folder:

```bash
mkdocs serve
```

This will rebuild the documentation on changes to `.md` files inside `docs`,
notebooks and python files.

On OSX, it is possible that the cairo lib file is not properly linked when installed
via homebrew. In this case you might encounter an error like this
```shell
OSError: no library called "cairo-2" was found
no library called "cairo" was found
no library called "libcairo-2" was found
```
when calling `mkdocs build` or `mkdocs serve`. This can be resolved via setting
the environment variable `DYLD_FALLBACK_LIBRARY_PATH`:
```shell
export DYLD_FALLBACK_LIBRARY_PATH=$DYLD_FALLBACK_LIBRARY_PATH:/opt/homebrew/lib
```

### Automatic API documentation

We use [mkdocstrings](https://mkdocstrings.github.io/) to automatically generate
API documentation from docstrings, following almost verbatim [this
recipe](https://mkdocstrings.github.io/recipes/#automatic-code-reference-pages):
Stubs are generated for all modules on the fly using
[generate_api_docs.py](https://github.com/aai-institute/pyDVL/blob/develop/build_scripts/generate_api_docs.py) thanks to the pluging
[mkdocstrings-gen-files](https://github.com/oprypin/mkdocs-gen-files) and
navigation is generated for
[mkdocs-literate-nav](https://github.com/oprypin/mkdocs-literate-nav).

With some renaming and using
[section-index](https://github.com/oprypin/mkdocs-section-index) `__init__.py`
files are used as entry points for the documentation of a module.

Since very often we re-export symbols in the `__init__.py` files, the automatic
generation of the documentation skips **all** symbols in those files. If you
want to document any in particular you can do so by **overriding
mkdocs_genfiles**: Create a file under `docs/api/pydvl/module/index.md` and add
your documentation there. For example, to document the whole module and every
(re-)exported symbol just add this to the file:

```markdown
::: pydvl.module
```


### Adding new pages

Navigation is configured in `mkdocs.yaml` using the nav section. We use the
plugin [mkdoc-literate-nav](https://oprypin.github.io/mkdocs-literate-nav/)
which allows fine-grained control of the navigation structure. However, most
pages are explicitly listed and manually arranged in the `nav` section of the
configuration.


### Creating stable references for autorefs

mkdocstrings includes the plugin
[autorefs](https://github.com/mkdocstrings/autorefs) to enable automatic linking
across pages with e.g. `[a link][to-something]`. Anchors are autogenerated
from section titles, and are not guaranteed to be unique. In order to ensure
that a link will remain valid, add a custom anchor to the section title:

```markdown
## Some section { #permanent-anchor-to-some-section }
```

(note the space after the opening brace). You can then refer to it within
another markdown file with `[Some section][permanent-anchor-to-some-section]`.

### Adding notes about new features, changes or deprecations

We use the admonition extension of
[Mkdocs Material](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/admonitions/)
to create admonitions, also known as call-outs, that hold information
about when a certain feature was added, changed or deprecated and optionally
a description with more details. We put the admonition directly
in a module's, a function's or class' docstring.

We use the following syntax:

```
!!! tip "<Event Type> in version <Version Number>"

    <Optional Description>
```

The description is useful when the note is about a smaller change
such as a parameter.

- For a new feature, we use:

  ```
  !!! tip "New in version <Version Number>"
  
      <Optional Description>
  ```

- For a change to an existing feature we use:

  ```
  !!! tip "Changed in version <Version Number>"

      <Optional Description>
  ```

  For example, for a change in version `1.2.3` that adds kwargs
  to a class' constructor we would write:

  ```
  !!! tip "Changed in version 1.2.3"

      Added kwargs to the constructor.
  ```

- For a deprecation we use:

  ```
  !!! tip "Deprecated in version <Version Number>"

      <Optional Description>
  ```

### Using bibliography

Bibliographic citations are managed with the plugin
[mkdocs-bibtex](https://github.com/shyamd/mkdocs-bibtex/). To enter a citation
first add the entry to `docs/pydvl.bib`. For team contributor this should be an
export of the Zotero folder `software/pydvl` in the [TransferLab Zotero
library](https://www.zotero.org/groups/2703043/transferlab/library). All other
contributors just add the bibtex data, and a maintainer will add it to the group
library upon merging.

To add a citation inside a markdown file, use the notation `[@ citekey]` (with
no space). Alas,
because of when mkdocs-bibtex enters the pipeline, it won't process docstrings.
For module documentation, we manually inject html into the markdown files. For
example, in `pydvl.value.shapley.montecarlo` we have:

```markdown
"""
Module docstring...

## References

[^1]: <a name="ghorbani_data_2019"></a>Ghorbani, A., Zou, J., 2019.
    [Data Shapley: Equitable Valuation of Data for Machine
    Learning](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/ghorbani19c.html).
    In: Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
    PMLR, pp. 2242–2251.
"""
```

and then later in the file, inside a function's docstring:

```markdown
    This function implements (Ghorbani and Zou, 2019)<sup><a 
    href="#ghorbani_data_2019">1</a></sup>
```

### Writing mathematics

Use LaTeX delimiters `$` and `$$` for inline and displayed mathematics
respectively.

**Warning: backslashes must be escaped in docstrings!** (although there are
exceptions). For simplicity, declare the string as "raw" with the prefix `r`:

```python
# This will work
def f(x: float) -> float:
    r""" Computes 
    $${ f(x) = \frac{1}{x^2} }$$
    """
    return 1/(x*x)

# This throws an obscure error
def f(x: float) -> float:
    """ Computes 
    $$\frac{1}{x^2}$$
    """
    return 1/(x*x)
```

Note how there is no space after the dollar signs. This is important! You can
use braces for legibility like in the first example.

### Abbreviations

We keep the abbreviations used in the documentation inside the
[docs_include/abbreviations.md](https://github.com/aai-institute/pyDVL/blob/develop/docs_includes/abbreviations.md) file.

The syntax for abbreviations is:

```markdown
*[ABBR]: Abbreviation
```

## CI

We use workflows to:

* Run the tests.
* Publish documentation.
* Publish packages to testpypi / pypi.
* Mark issues as stale after 30 days. We do this only for issues with the label
  [`awaiting-reply`](https://github.com/aai-institute/pyDVL/labels/awaiting-reply)
  which indicates that we have answered a question / feature request / PR and
  are waiting for the OP to reply / update his work.

### Tests

We test all algorithms with simple datasets in CI jobs. This can amount to a
sizeable amount of time, so care must be taken not to overdo it:
1. All algorithm tests must be on very simple datasets and as quick as possible
2. We try not to trigger CI pipelines when unnecessary (see [Skipping CI
runs](#skipping-ci-runs)).
3. We split the tests based on their duration into groups and run them in parallel.
  
   For that we use [pytest-split](https://jerry-git.github.io/pytest-split)
   to first store the duration of all tests with
   `tox -e tests -- --store-durations --slow-tests`
   in a `.test_durations` file.
   
   Alternatively, we case use pytest directly
   `pytest --store-durations --slow-tests`.

   > **Note** This does not have to be done each time a new test or test case
   > is added. For new tests and test cases pytes-split assumes
   > average test execution time(calculated based on the stored information)
   > for every test which does not have duration information stored.
   > Thus, there's no need to store durations after changing the test suite.
   > However, when there are major changes in the suite compared
   > to what's stored in .test_durations, it's recommended to update
   > the duration information with `--store-durations` to ensure
   > that the splitting is in balance.
   
   Then we can have as many splits as we want:

   ```shell
   tox -e tests -- --splits 3 --group 1
   tox -e tests -- --splits 3 --group 2
   tox -e tests -- --splits 3 --group 3
   ```
   
   Alternatively, we case use pytest directly
   `pytest --splits 3 ---group 1`.
   
   Each one of these commands should be run in a separate shell/job
   to run the test groups in parallel and decrease the total runtime.


### Running Github Actions locally

To run Github Actions locally we use [act](https://github.com/nektos/act).
It uses the workflows defined in `.github/workflows` and determines
the set of actions that need to be run. It uses the Docker API
to either pull or build the necessary images, as defined
in our workflow files and finally determines the execution path
based on the dependencies that were defined.

Once it has the execution path, it then uses the Docker API
to run containers for each action based on the images prepared earlier.
The [environment variables](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/variables#default-environment-variables) 
and [filesystem](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-github-hosted-runners/about-github-hosted-runners#file-systems)
are all configured to match what GitHub provides.

You can install it manually using:

```shell
curl -s https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nektos/act/master/install.sh | sudo bash -s -- -d -b ~/bin 
```

And then simply add it to your PATH variable: `PATH=~/bin:$PATH`

Refer to its official
[readme](https://github.com/nektos/act#installation-through-package-managers)
for more installation options.

#### act cheatsheet

By default, `act` will run **all  workflows** in `.github/workflows`. You can
use the `-W` flag to specify a specific workflow file to run, or you can rely
on the job id to be unique (but then you'll see warnings for the workflows
without that job id).

```shell
# Run only the main tests for python 3.9 after a push event (implicit) 
act -W .github/workflows/run-tests-workflow.yaml \
    -j run-tests \
    --input tests_to_run=base\
    --input python_version=3.9
```

Other common flags are: 

```shell
# List all actions for all events:
act -l

# List the actions for a specific event:
act workflow_dispatch -l

# List the actions for a specific job:
act -j lint -l

# Run the default (`push`) event:
act

# Run a specific event:
act pull_request

# Run a specific job:
act -j lint

# Collect artifacts to the /tmp/artifacts folder:
act --artifact-server-path /tmp/artifacts

# Run a job in a specific workflow (useful if you have duplicate job names)
act -j lint -W .github/workflows/publish.yml

# Run in dry-run mode:
act -n

# Enable verbose-logging (can be used with any of the above commands)
act -v
```

#### Example

To run the `publish` job (the most difficult one to test)
you would simply use:

- When triggered by a release:

  ```shell
  act release -j publish --eventpath events.json
  ```

  With `events.json` containing:

  ```json
  {
    "act": true
  }
  ```
  
  This will use your current branch. If you want to test a specific branch
  you have to use the `workflow_dispatch` event (see below).

- To instead run it as if it had been manually triggered (i.e. `workflow_dispatch`)
  you would instead use:

  ```shell
  act workflow_dispatch -j publish --eventpath events.json
  ```

  With `events.json` containing:

  ```json
  {
    "act": true,
    "inputs": {
      "tag_name": "v0.6.0"
    }
  }
  ```

### Skipping CI runs

One sometimes would like to skip CI for certain commits (e.g. updating the
readme). In order to do this, simply prefix the commit message with `[skip ci]`.
The string can be anywhere, but adding it to the beginning of the commit message
makes it more evident when looking at commits in a PR.

Refer to the official [GitHub
documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/managing-workflow-runs/skipping-workflow-runs) 
for more information.

## Release processes

### Automatic release process

In order to create an automatic release, a few prerequisites need to be
satisfied:

- The project's virtualenv needs to be active
- The repository needs to be on the `develop` branch
- The repository must be clean (including no untracked files)

Then, a new release can be created using the script
`build_scripts/release-version.sh` (leave out the version parameter to have
`bumpversion` automatically derive the next release version by bumping the patch
part):

```shell
build_scripts/release-version.sh 0.1.6
```

To find out how to use the script, pass the `-h` or `--help` flags:

```shell
build_scripts/release-version.sh --help
```

If running in interactive mode (without `-y|--yes`), the script will output a
summary of pending changes and ask for confirmation before executing the
actions.

Once this is done, a tag will be created on the repository. You should then
create a GitHub
[release](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/managing-releases-in-a-repository#creating-a-release)
for that tag. That will a trigger a CI pipeline that will automatically create a
package and publish it from CI to PyPI.

### Manual release process

If the automatic release process doesn't cover your use case, you can also
create a new release manually by following these steps:

1. (Repeat as needed) implement features on feature branches merged into
  `develop`. Each merge into develop will publish a new pre-release version 
   to TestPyPI. These versions can be installed using `pip install --pre 
   --index-url https://test.pypi.org/simple/`.
2. When ready to release: From the develop branch create the release branch and
   perform release activities (update changelog, news, ...). For your own
   convenience, define an env variable for the release version
    ```shell
    export RELEASE_VERSION="vX.Y.Z"
    git checkout develop
    git branch release/${RELEASE_VERSION} && git checkout release/${RELEASE_VERSION}
    ```
3. Run `bumpversion --commit release` if the release is only a patch release,
   otherwise the full version can be specified using 
   `bumpversion --commit --new-version X.Y.Z release`
   (the `release` part is ignored but required by bumpversion :rolling_eyes:).
4. Merge the release branch into `master`, tag the merge commit, and push back to the repo. 
   The CI pipeline publishes the package based on the tagged commit.
    ```shell
    git checkout master
    git merge --no-ff release/${RELEASE_VERSION}
    git tag -a ${RELEASE_VERSION} -m"Release ${RELEASE_VERSION}"
    git push --follow-tags origin master
    ```
5. Switch back to the release branch `release/vX.Y.Z` and pre-bump the version:
   `bumpversion --commit patch`. This ensures that `develop` pre-releases are
   always strictly more recent than the last published release version from 
   `master`.
6. Merge the release branch into `develop`:
    ```shell
    git checkout develop
    git merge --no-ff release/${RELEASE_VERSION}
    git push origin develop
    ```
7. Delete the release branch if necessary: 
   `git branch -d release/${RELEASE_VERSION}`
8. Create a GitHub
   [release](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/managing-releases-in-a-repository#creating-a-release)
   for the created tag.
9. Pour yourself a cup of coffee, you earned it! :coffee: :sparkles:
10. A package will be automatically created and published from CI to PyPI.

### CI and requirements for publishing

In order to publish new versions of the package from the development branch,
the CI pipeline requires the following secret variables set up:

```
TEST_PYPI_USERNAME
TEST_PYPI_PASSWORD
PYPI_USERNAME
PYPI_PASSWORD
```

The first 2 are used after tests run on the develop branch's CI workflow 
to automatically publish packages to [TestPyPI](https://test.pypi.org/).

The last 2 are used in the
[publish.yaml](https://github.com/aai-institute/pyDVL/blob/develop/.github/workflows/publish.yaml)
CI workflow to publish packages to [PyPI](https://pypi.org/) from `develop`
after a GitHub release.

#### Publish to TestPyPI

We use [bump2version](https://pypi.org/project/bump2version/) to bump
the build part of the version number without commiting or tagging the change
and then publish a package to TestPyPI from CI using Twine. The version
has the GitHub run number appended. 

For more details refer to the file
[.github/workflows/publish.yaml](https://github.com/aai-institute/pyDVL/blob/develop/.github/workflows/publish.yaml).
