docs/value/data-oob.md, before:

---
title: Data-OOB
alias: data-oob-intro
---

# Data valuation for bagged models with Data-OOB  { #data-oob-intro }

Data-OOB [@kwon_dataoob_2023] is a method for valuing data used to train bagged
models. It defines value as the out-of-bag (OOB) performance estimate for the
model, overcoming the computational bottleneck of Shapley-based data valuation
methods: Instead of fitting a large number of models to accurately estimate
marginal contributions like Shapley-based methods, Data-OOB evaluates each weak
learner in an ensemble over samples it hasn't seen during training, and averages
the performance across all weak learners.

More precisely, for a bagging model with $B$ estimators $\hat{f}_b, b \in [B]$,
we define $w_{bj}$ as the number of times that the $j$-th sample is in the
training set of the $b$-th estimator. For a **fixed** choice of bootstrapped
training sets, the Data-OOB value of sample $(x_i, y_i)$ is defined as:
 
$$ \psi_i := \frac{\sum_{b=1}^{B}\mathbb{1}(w_{bi}=0)T(y_i, 
   \hat{f}_b(x_i))}{\sum_{b=1}^{B} \mathbb{1} (w_{bi}=0)},
$$

where $T: Y \times Y \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ is a score function that represents
the goodness of weak learner $\hat{f}_b$ at the $i$-th datum $(x_i, y_i)$.

$\psi$ can therefore be interpreted as a per-sample partition of the standard
OOB error estimate for a bagging model, which is: $\frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^n
\psi_i$.

## Computing values

The main class is
[DataOOBValuation][pydvl.valuation.methods.data_oob.DataOOBValuation]. It takes
a *fitted* bagged model and uses data precomputed during training to calculate
the values. It is therefore very fast, and can be used to value large datasets.

??? example "Using Data-OOB with a RandomForest"
    This is how you would use it with a [RandomForestClassifier][sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier]. 
    ```python
    from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
    from pydvl.valuation import DataOOBValuation, Dataset
    
    train, test = Dataset(...), Dataset(...)
    model = RandomForestClassifier(...)
    model.fit(*train.data())
    valuation = DataOOBValuation(model)
    result = valuation.fit(train).result
    ```

The object returned by `values()` is a
[ValuationResult][pydvl.valuation.result.ValuationResult] to be used for data
inspection, cleaning, etc.

Data-OOB is not limited to sklearn's `RandomForest`, but can be used with
any bagging model that defines the attribute `estimators_`  after fitting and
makes the list of bootstrapped samples available in some way. This includes
`BaggingRegressor`, `BaggingClassifier`, `ExtraTreesClassifier`,
`ExtraTreesRegressor` and `IsolationForest`.

## Bagging arbitrary models

Through `BaggingClassifier` and `BaggingRegressor`, one can compute values
for any model that can be bagged. Bagging in itself is not necessarily always
beneficial, and there are cases where it can be detrimental. However, for data
valuation we are not interested in the performance of the bagged model, but in
the valuation coming out of it, which can then be used to work on the original
model and data.

??? example "Bagging a k-NN classifier"
    ```python
    from sklearn.ensemble import BaggingClassifier
    from sklearn.neighbors import KNeighborsClassifier
    from pydvl.valuation import DataOOBValuation, Dataset
    
    train, test = Dataset(...), Dataset(...)
    model = BaggingClassifier(
        estimator=KNeighborsClassifier(n_neighbors=10),
        n_estimators=20)
    model.fit(*train.data())
    valuation = DataOOBValuation(model)
    valuation.fit(train)
    values = valuation.values(sort=True)
    low_values = values[:int(0.05*len(train))]  # select lowest 5%
    ...
    ```

### Off-topic: When not to bag models

Here are some guidelines for when bagging might unnecessarily increase
computational cost, or even be detrimental:

1. **Low-variance models**: Models like linear regression, support vector
   machines, or other inherently stable algorithms typically have low variance.
   However, even these models can benefit from bagging in certain scenarios,
   particularly with noisy data or when there are influential outliers.

2. **When the model is already highly regularized**: If a model is regularized
   (e.g., Lasso, Ridge, or Elastic Net), it is already tuned to avoid
   overfitting and reduce variance, so bagging might not provide much of a
   benefit for its high computational cost.

3. **When data is limited**: Bagging works by creating multiple subsets of the
   data via bootstrapping. If the dataset is too small, the bootstrap samples
   might overlap significantly or exclude important patterns, reducing the
   effectiveness of bagging.

4. **When features are highly correlated**: If features are highly correlated,
   the individual models trained on different bootstrap samples may end up being
   too similar.
   
5. **For inherently stable models**: Models that are naturally resistant to
   changes in the training data (like nearest neighbors) may not benefit
   significantly from bagging's variance reduction properties.

6. **When interpretability is critical**: Bagging produces an ensemble of
   models, which makes the overall model less interpretable compared to a single
   model. There are however manye techniques to maintain interpretability, like 
   partial dependence plots.

7. **When the bias-variance trade-off favors bias reduction**: If the model's 
   error is primarily due to bias rather than variance, techniques that address
   bias (like boosting) might be more appropriate than bagging.

## Transferring values

As with any other valuation method, you can transfer the values to a different
model, and given the efficiency of Data-OOB, this can be done very quickly. A
simple workflow is to compute values using a random forest, then use them to
inspect the data and clean it, and finally train a more complex model on the
cleaned data. Whether this is a valid idea or not will depend on the specific
dataset.

## A comment about sampling

One might fear that there is a problem because the computation of the value
$\psi_i$ requires at least some bootstrap samples *not* to include the $i$-th
sample. But we can see that this is rarely an issue, and its probability of
happening can be easily computed: For a training set of size $n$ and
bootstrapping sample size $m \le n$, the probability that index $i$ is not
included in a bootstrap sample is $\prod_{j=1}^m \mathbb{P}(i \text{ is not
drawn at pos. } j) = (1 - 1/n)^m$, i.e. for each of the $m$ draws, the number is
not picked (for $m=n$ this converges to $1/e \approx 0.368$). The probability
that across $B$ bootstrapped samples a point is not included is therefore $(1  -
1/n)^{mB}$, which is typically extremely low.

Incidentally, this allows us to estimate the estimated number of unique indices
in a bootstrap sample of size $m$ as $m(1 - 1/n)^m$.

Commit message:

Update docs with mention of tensors

docs/value/data-oob.md, after:

---
title: Data-OOB
alias: data-oob-intro
---

# Data valuation for bagged models with Data-OOB  { #data-oob-intro }

Data-OOB [@kwon_dataoob_2023] is a method for valuing data used to train bagged
models. It defines value as the out-of-bag (OOB) performance estimate for the
model, overcoming the computational bottleneck of Shapley-based data valuation
methods: Instead of fitting a large number of models to accurately estimate
marginal contributions like Shapley-based methods, Data-OOB evaluates each weak
learner in an ensemble over samples it hasn't seen during training, and averages
the performance across all weak learners.

More precisely, for a bagging model with $B$ estimators $\hat{f}_b, b \in [B]$,
we define $w_{bj}$ as the number of times that the $j$-th sample is in the
training set of the $b$-th estimator. For a **fixed** choice of bootstrapped
training sets, the Data-OOB value of sample $(x_i, y_i)$ is defined as:
 
$$ \psi_i := \frac{\sum_{b=1}^{B}\mathbb{1}(w_{bi}=0)T(y_i, 
   \hat{f}_b(x_i))}{\sum_{b=1}^{B} \mathbb{1} (w_{bi}=0)},
$$

where $T: Y \times Y \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ is a score function that represents
the goodness of weak learner $\hat{f}_b$ at the $i$-th datum $(x_i, y_i)$.

$\psi$ can therefore be interpreted as a per-sample partition of the standard
OOB error estimate for a bagging model, which is: $\frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^n
\psi_i$.

## Computing values

The main class is
[DataOOBValuation][pydvl.valuation.methods.data_oob.DataOOBValuation]. It takes
a *fitted* bagged model and uses data precomputed during training to calculate
the values. It is therefore very fast, and can be used to value large datasets.

??? example "Using Data-OOB with a RandomForest"
    This is how you would use it with a [RandomForestClassifier][sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier]. 
    ```python
    from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
    from pydvl.valuation import DataOOBValuation, Dataset
    
    train, test = Dataset(...), Dataset(...)
    model = RandomForestClassifier(...)
    model.fit(*train.data())
    valuation = DataOOBValuation(model)
    result = valuation.fit(train).result
    ```

The object returned by `values()` is a
[ValuationResult][pydvl.valuation.result.ValuationResult] to be used for data
inspection, cleaning, etc.

Data-OOB is not limited to sklearn's `RandomForest`, but can be used with
any bagging model that defines the attribute `estimators_`  after fitting and
makes the list of bootstrapped samples available in some way. This includes
`BaggingRegressor`, `BaggingClassifier`, `ExtraTreesClassifier`,
`ExtraTreesRegressor` and `IsolationForest`.

!!! info "PyTorch support"
    With the introduction of version 0.10.1, Data-OOB supports PyTorch tensor
    inputs with certain limitations. Standard scikit-learn bagging models (like
    [BaggingClassifier][] or [RandomForest][]) require NumPy inputs for training,
    even though the dataset used for valuation can contain tensors. For full
    tensor support throughout the pipeline, you must implement a custom bagging
    model class that implements the [BaggingModel][pydvl.valuation.types.BaggingModel]
    interface with support for tensor operations. This custom model must provide
    the following attributes:
    
      - `estimators_`: list of fitted base estimators
      - `estimators_samples_`: list of sample indices used to train each estimator
        (as NumPy arrays)
    
    (There is a mock in `tests.valuation.methods.conftest.TorchBaggingClassifier`).
    See [Tensor Support][tensor-support] for more general information about tensor
    support in pyDVL.

## Bagging arbitrary models

Through `BaggingClassifier` and `BaggingRegressor`, one can compute values
for any model that can be bagged. Bagging in itself is not necessarily always
beneficial, and there are cases where it can be detrimental. However, for data
valuation we are not interested in the performance of the bagged model, but in
the valuation coming out of it, which can then be used to work on the original
model and data.

??? example "Bagging a k-NN classifier"
    ```python
    from sklearn.ensemble import BaggingClassifier
    from sklearn.neighbors import KNeighborsClassifier
    from pydvl.valuation import DataOOBValuation, Dataset
    
    train, test = Dataset(...), Dataset(...)
    model = BaggingClassifier(
        estimator=KNeighborsClassifier(n_neighbors=10),
        n_estimators=20)
    model.fit(*train.data())
    valuation = DataOOBValuation(model)
    valuation.fit(train)
    values = valuation.values(sort=True)
    low_values = values[:int(0.05*len(train))]  # select lowest 5%
    ...
    ```

### Off-topic: When not to bag models

Here are some guidelines for when bagging might unnecessarily increase
computational cost, or even be detrimental:

1. **Low-variance models**: Models like linear regression, support vector
   machines, or other inherently stable algorithms typically have low variance.
   However, even these models can benefit from bagging in certain scenarios,
   particularly with noisy data or when there are influential outliers.

2. **When the model is already highly regularized**: If a model is regularized
   (e.g., Lasso, Ridge, or Elastic Net), it is already tuned to avoid
   overfitting and reduce variance, so bagging might not provide much of a
   benefit for its high computational cost.

3. **When data is limited**: Bagging works by creating multiple subsets of the
   data via bootstrapping. If the dataset is too small, the bootstrap samples
   might overlap significantly or exclude important patterns, reducing the
   effectiveness of bagging.

4. **When features are highly correlated**: If features are highly correlated,
   the individual models trained on different bootstrap samples may end up being
   too similar.
   
5. **For inherently stable models**: Models that are naturally resistant to
   changes in the training data (like nearest neighbors) may not benefit
   significantly from bagging's variance reduction properties.

6. **When interpretability is critical**: Bagging produces an ensemble of
   models, which makes the overall model less interpretable compared to a single
   model. There are however manye techniques to maintain interpretability, like 
   partial dependence plots.

7. **When the bias-variance trade-off favors bias reduction**: If the model's 
   error is primarily due to bias rather than variance, techniques that address
   bias (like boosting) might be more appropriate than bagging.

## Transferring values

As with any other valuation method, you can transfer the values to a different
model, and given the efficiency of Data-OOB, this can be done very quickly. A
simple workflow is to compute values using a random forest, then use them to
inspect the data and clean it, and finally train a more complex model on the
cleaned data. Whether this is a valid idea or not will depend on the specific
dataset.

## A comment about sampling

One might fear that there is a problem because the computation of the value
$\psi_i$ requires at least some bootstrap samples *not* to include the $i$-th
sample. But we can see that this is rarely an issue, and its probability of
happening can be easily computed: For a training set of size $n$ and
bootstrapping sample size $m \le n$, the probability that index $i$ is not
included in a bootstrap sample is $\prod_{j=1}^m \mathbb{P}(i \text{ is not
drawn at pos. } j) = (1 - 1/n)^m$, i.e. for each of the $m$ draws, the number is
not picked (for $m=n$ this converges to $1/e \approx 0.368$). The probability
that across $B$ bootstrapped samples a point is not included is therefore $(1  -
1/n)^{mB}$, which is typically extremely low.

Incidentally, this allows us to estimate the estimated number of unique indices
in a bootstrap sample of size $m$ as $m(1 - 1/n)^m$.
